# PFRE

PFRE is a pf rule editor for OpenBSD 5.9. PFRE is expected to be used by beginners and system administrators alike.

You can find a couple of screenshots on the [wiki](https://github.com/sonertari/PFRE/wiki).

## Features

Using PFRE, you can develop rules from scratch or modify existing ones:

- Load, save, upload, download, and delete rule files.
- Display the rules in a tabular form, classified to their rule types and parsed into their individual elements.
- Add and delete rules, and move them within the ruleset.
- Edit rules in almost all possible detail: PFRE supports most, if not all of the BNF syntax specification in pf.conf(5).
- Test rules: PFRE validates all input and tests rules using pfctl to provide detailed error reports on-the-fly, while editing individual rules or displaying whole rulesets.
- Install the rules as the main ruleset, and activate them by loading into pf.

A couple of notes about the requirements, design decisions, and implementation of PFRE:

- PFRE does not provide any wizards nor tries to simplify rule development by hiding details. On the contrary, it enables the user by providing as much relevant detail as possible.
- PFRE aims to generate text ruleset output as close to what a system administrator would produce as possible:
	+ PFRE tries to be true to the original rule file loaded: PFRE does not insert any extra lines into its output, such as PFRE specific marks or rule generation dates (you cannot tell if its output is generated by PFRE or not).
	+ You can insert blank lines between rules: Blank lines are of a separate rule type.
	+ Comments are of a separate rule type too.
	+ All other rule types support inline comments.
- The edit page provides help links to relevant sections on the pf.conf(5) man page, which opens in a separate tab on your browser.
- PFRE uses gettext to support different languages, currently English and Turkish only.
- All important messages and test results are reported in error and information boxes.
- PFRE writes detailed logs to syslog, which you can filter into separate log files.
- PFRE uses MVC design to separate business logic from presentation, e.g. the View does not know how to parse, generate, validate or test pf rules (it is as thin or dumb as possible).
- PFRE has been tested using PHPUnit and Codeception.
- Source code is documented using Doxygen.
- PFRE takes security seriously:
	+ All input is untainted.
	+ Invalid rules are never tested using pfctl.
	+ Pfctl is executed in a separate process, which times out if pfctl takes too long.
	+ As the sole gatekeeper for the Model, PFRE controller, pfrec is the only executable enabled in the doas configuration. Pfrec validates all commands and their arguments given to it.
	+ The View executes all controller commands over an SSH connection.
	+ Passwords are never visible plain text anywhere.
	+ The View never reaches to the filesystem, nor runs any system executable (perhaps only /bin/sleep and /bin/date).
	+ All system executables are called using their full pathnames.
	+ The number of nested anchors in inline rules is restricted to a configurable maximum.
	+ JavaScript use is kept to a minimum.

## How to install

Here are the basic steps to obtain a working PFRE installation:

- Install OpenBSD 5.9, perhaps in a VM.
- Install Apache 1.3.29, PHP 5.6.18, php-pcntl 5.6.18, and php-mcrypt 5.6.18.
- Copy the files in PFRE src folder to /var/www/htdocs/pfre/.
- Configure a Virtual Host in httpd.conf for PFRE, preferably an SSL Virtual Host too.
- Create admin and user users, and set their passwords.
- Enable pfrec.php in doas for admin and user users, and make sure pfrec.php is executable.
- Point your web browser to the web server and log in as admin:soner123.

The following sections provide the details.

### Install OpenBSD

The OpenBSD installation guide is in [faq4](http://www.openbsd.org/faq/faq4.html).

Here are a couple of guidelines:

- You can download install59.iso available at OpenBSD ftp or http mirrors.
- It may be easier to install a PFRE test system on a VM of your choice, e.g. VMware or VirtualBox, rather than bare hardware.
- 1GB RAM and 8GB HD should be more than enough.
- If you want to obtain a packet filtering firewall, make sure the VM has at least 2 ethernet interfaces:
	+ The external interface may obtain its IP address over DHCP
	+ The internal interface should have a static IP address
- You can simply accept the default disk layout and partitions suggested by the OpenBSD install script.
- You can safely leave out x\*, comp\*, and game\* install sets; you won't need them for a PFRE test system.

Reboot the system after installation is complete and log in as root.

### Install packages

Create a package cache folder:

	# cd /var/db/
	# mkdir pkg_cache

Set the $PKG\_PATH env variable to the cache folder you have just created:

	# export PKG_PATH=/var/db/pkg_cache/

Download the required packages from an OpenBSD mirror and copy them to $PKG\_PATH. The following is the list of files you should have under $PKG\_PATH:

	apache-httpd-common-2.4.18.tgz
	apache-httpd-openbsd-1.3.20140502p6.tgz
	femail-1.0p1.tgz
	femail-chroot-1.0p2.tgz
	gettext-0.19.7.tgz
	libiconv-1.14p3.tgz
	libltdl-2.4.2p1.tgz
	libmcrypt-2.5.8p2.tgz
	libxml-2.9.3.tgz
	php-5.6.18.tgz
	php-mcrypt-5.6.18.tgz
	php-pcntl-5.6.18.tgz
	xz-5.2.2p0.tgz

Install Apache, PHP, php-pcntl, and php-mcrypt by running the following commands, which should install their dependencies as well:

	# pkg_add -v apache-httpd-openbsd
	# pkg_add -v php
	# pkg_add -v php-pcntl
	# pkg_add -v php-mcrypt

If you want to see if all required packages are installed successfully, run the following command:

	# pkg_info -a

Here is the expected output of that command:

	apache-httpd-common-2.4.18 shared files for Apache 1 and 2
	apache-httpd-openbsd-1.3.20140502p6 OpenBSD improved and secured version of Apache 1.3
	femail-1.0p1        simple SMTP client
	femail-chroot-1.0p2 simple SMTP client for chrooted web servers
	gettext-0.19.7      GNU gettext runtime libraries and programs
	libiconv-1.14p3     character set conversion library
	libltdl-2.4.2p1     GNU libtool system independent dlopen wrapper
	libmcrypt-2.5.8p2   interface to access block/stream encryption algorithms
	libxml-2.9.3        XML parsing library
	php-5.6.18          server-side HTML-embedded scripting language
	php-mcrypt-5.6.18   mcrypt encryption/decryption extensions for php5
	php-pcntl-5.6.18    PCNTL extensions for php5
	xz-5.2.2p0          LZMA compression and decompression tools

### Install PFRE

Create a 'pfre' folder under /var/www/htdocs/ and copy all the contents of the PFRE src folder to /var/www/htdocs/pfre/. Their user permissions should be root:daemon.

Make sure /var/www/htdocs/pfre/Controller/pfrec.php is executable. If not, go to /var/www/htdocs/pfre/Controller/ and make it executable:

	# cd /var/www/htdocs/pfre/Controller/
	# chmod u+x pfrec.php

#### Configure Apache

Configure Virtual Host setups for PFRE in httpd.conf. Your configuration might look like the following:

	<VirtualHost _default_:80>
	    DocumentRoot /var/www/htdocs/pfre/View
	    ServerName pfre
	    ErrorLog logs/pfre_error_log
	    TransferLog logs/pfre_access_log
	</VirtualHost>

You are advised to repeat the same configuration for SSL Virtual Host `<VirtualHost _default_:443>` also.

Create a self-signed server certificate. Run the following commands to generate your own CA:

	# openssl genrsa -des3 -out ca.key 4096
	# openssl req -new -x509 -days 365 -key ca.key -out ca.crt

Next, to generate a server key and request for signing, run the following:

	# openssl genrsa -des3 -out server.key 4096
	# openssl req -new -key server.key -out server.csr

You should sign the certificate signing request (csr) with the self-created certificate authority (CA) that you
made earlier:

	# openssl x509 -req -days 365 -in server.csr -CA ca.crt -CAkey ca.key -set_serial 01 -out server.crt

To make a server.key which doesn't cause apache to prompt for a password:

	# openssl rsa -in server.key -out server.key.insecure
	# mv server.key server.key.secure
	# mv server.key.insecure server.key

Finally, you should copy server.crt and server.key files to the locations defined in httpd.conf:

	# cp server.key /etc/ssl/private/        
	# cp server.crt /etc/ssl/ 

Run adduser(8) to create admin and user users, for example with the following values:

	Name:        admin
	Password:    ****
	Fullname:    PFRE admin
	Uid:         1000
	Gid:         1000 (admin)
	Groups:      admin 
	Login Class: default
	HOME:        /home/admin
	Shell:       /bin/ksh

	Name:        user
	Password:    ****
	Fullname:    PFRE user
	Uid:         1001
	Gid:         1001 (user)
	Groups:      user 
	Login Class: default
	HOME:        /home/user
	Shell:       /bin/ksh

Then set their passswords to soner123 by running the following commands:

	# /usr/bin/chpass -a "admin:$(/usr/bin/encrypt `/bin/echo -n soner123 | sha1 -`):1000:1000::0:0:PFRE admin:/home/admin:/bin/ksh"
	# /usr/bin/chpass -a "user:$(/usr/bin/encrypt `/bin/echo -n soner123 | sha1 -`):1001:1001::0:0:PFRE user:/home/user:/bin/ksh"

However, you are advised to pick a better password than soner123.

#### Configure PHP

Go to /usr/local/bin/ and create a link to php executable:

	# cd /usr/local/bin
	# ln -s php-5.6 php

Go to /var/www/conf/modules and copy the sample php configuration file to it:

	# cd /var/www/conf/modules/
	# cp ../modules.sample/php-5.6.conf .

To enable pcntl and mcrypt, go to /etc/php-5.6/ and create the pcntl.ini and mcrypt.ini files:

	# cd /etc/php-5.6/
	# touch pcntl.ini
	# touch mcrypt.ini

And add the following line to pcntl.ini:

	extension=pcntl.so

Then add the following line to mcrypt.ini:

	extension=mcrypt.so

#### Configure doas

Go to /etc/ and create the doas.conf file:

	# cd /etc/
	# touch doas.conf

And add the following lines to it:

	permit nopass admin as root cmd /var/www/htdocs/pfre/Controller/pfrec.php
	permit nopass user as root cmd /var/www/htdocs/pfre/Controller/pfrec.php
	permit nopass keepenv root as root

#### Configure the system

If you want the web server to be started automatically after a reboot, first copy the sample rc.local file to /etc/:

	# cd /etc/
	# cp examples/rc.local .

Then add the following lines to it:

	if [ -x /usr/local/sbin/httpd ]; then
	        echo 'starting apache web server.'
	        /usr/local/sbin/httpd -u -DSSL >/dev/null 2>&1
	fi

Also, if you want to use this PFRE test system as a firewall, you should enable packet forwarding between interfaces in /etc/sysctl.conf. So, copy the sample sysctl.conf file under /etc/examples/ to /etc/:

	# cd /etc/
	# cp examples/sysctl.conf .

And uncomment the line which enables forwarding of IPv4 packets:

	net.inet.ip.forwarding=1

### Start PFRE

Now you can either reboot the system or start the Apache web server manually using the following command line:

	# /usr/local/sbin/httpd -u -DSSL 

Note that you should fully stop any httpd already running for the changes to take effect.

Finally, if you point your web browser to the IP address of PFRE, you should see the login page. And you should be able to log in by entering admin:soner123 as user and password.

